once around shell
galaxies. These are elliptical galaxies
that seem to contain a ring of stars
around them. And you've got an example
there on the main title screen. But
here's another one, Messier Object 94 in
Canis Venataside, the constellation of
the hunting dogs. And this has a very
bright center. And then around it, you
see those
shells of bright material. Right in the
center, you got the old yellow and uh
orange and red stars. Then you got a
ring of blue hot stars, young new stars
having been formed around it. And then
gradually those shells making these
concentric pattern around the center.
that outermost rather faint ring around
it. NGC
1344 down in the southern constellation
of Forex shows the structure as well.
This would look like an normal
elliptical galaxy about 60 million light
years away. But out beyond the central
region of the complicated arcs and
shells and an outer diffuse halo many
times the size of the main galaxy. It's
a little hard to see in the image, but
down towards the bottom, you can
certainly see part of that two or three
times the radius of the main galaxy away
just below that little yellow star in
the center of the
image. So, what's going on? Are these
the results of merges? Well, it seems
highly probable. Here's another one. NGC
3923. We have this onion-like structure
again, and they've detected about 20
layers of rings in the overall structure
of this galaxy indicating a whole lot of
activity has gone on in the recent past.
And we find this sort of structure with
these shells in about one in 10 of the
elliptical galaxies and never in a
spiral galaxy. You don't find spirals
with this sort of structure at
all. One galactic oddball is this one.
This is ESO
381-12, 270 million lighty years from uh
the solar
system down in the southern
constellation of Centurus. And you can
see the bright central region of the
galaxy surrounded by those ghostly
shells getting fainter and dustier as
they go out. So it again looks like
there's been a collision in the recent
past. If you look around the galaxy, you
can see lots of smaller uh tiny
galaxies, probably more distant in the
background, but one or two nearby ones.
In particular, there's one sneaking onto
the image at the right hand side there
that's a companion and may be involved.
But this galaxy is unusual. It's a
lenticular galaxy. You don't hear much
about lenticular galaxies. There aren't
that many of them. And they're a weird
hybrid between a spiral and an
elliptical. And we don't quite know what
to make of this one because we very very
rarely see the shell structure for an
elliptical uh anything but an elliptical
galaxy. So a lenticular galaxy with
shells is very very much a bit of a
cosmic mystery. It probably has had an
interaction recently, maybe with its
neighbor, maybe with one that it's
merged with, and that's created a whole
lot of new
stars. The shock waves moving outwards
have triggered off new star formation uh
and a lot of bright stars there in that
shell structure.
One that you can find with an amateur
grade telescope is the Umbrella Galaxy
NGC 4651. I don't know why uh Charles
Messier didn't have this in his catalog
in fact, but it is difficult for us to
estimate the distance. We're not sure
whether this is between 35 and 72
million light years away. Probably
somewhere in the
middle. It's an outer member of the
Virgo cluster which I've mentioned in
other videos and which the Milky Way and
Andromeda are going to merge with in the
distant future. And off to the right, we
can see a streamer of stars there, which
is the remains of a small galaxy that's
been torn apart by the strong gravity of
its larger neighbor and has created that
sort of halo around the outside there.
And that's uh contains a lot of neutral
hydrogen was detected by radio
telescopes. And it could be that off to
the right hand side, just where the
image gets rather misty there, there is
a new dwarf galaxy being born out of
that streamer of material. So it could
be a galaxy in formation as a result of
this previous train
wreck. Here's a pair of galaxies that
have definitely been interacting
recently. 100 million light years away
in the constellation of Pisces, we have
NGC 474 and
470. And you can see the two of them,
the smaller spiral armed blue outer
reaches of NGC 470 with its yellowy
orange nucleus. Classic spiral
structure. And then the shell galaxy
NGC474 with all those wispy ghostly
shells and arcs moving away from it. And
we're not quite sure whether it has been
an interaction between NGC 474 and 470
that's created that structure or whether
474 actually merged with another smaller
galaxy earlier on and that these two are
now approaching each other and going to
undergo yet another galactic merger
event.
If we zoom in on uh 474, you can really
see that structure resulting from this
uh previous collision and all of the
delicate shells that it's created. It's
a very very beautiful image, I think.
And uh it's uh all these ripples being
sent outwards through the uh clouds of
stars that are in the uh gap between the
galaxies there. Quite amazing. And I've
got a simulation here which we'll try to
get to work. And we'll run that now of a
couple of galaxies colliding. There they
go. Near miss and then near miss again
and then a full collision. And as it
does so you can see the simulation is
generating that same sort of layered
structure of shells of gas around the
central bright region. So it just goes
to show that the mathematics of galaxy
merges and formations with all these
small galaxies coming in and gradually
building one larger one but in the
process creating all these shells around
it really does uh simulate the sorts of
things that we see. Here comes another
merger. Look galaxy whipping round. Uh
it's quite amazing and you can
definitely see those streamers, arcs and
the uh shell structure forming as this
uh simulation
runs. Just
amazing. And finally, we have a galaxy
cluster here with a very large number of
galaxies in it. And around it, a huge
gas shell, showing that these clusters
do end up with an enormous amount of
material
ejected during the merger process that
builds the giant ellipticals, creating a
shell of gas right around the cluster,
not just round the individual galaxies
themselves. And the other thing you can
see in this image is that there is the
nearby cluster with all the gas. But
behind it there are
lensed gravitationally lensed more
distant arcs and streaks from other ga
galaxies much more distant behind where
the effect of curved space caused by the
mass of the
intervening material is stretching their
images out into these great long rings
and arcs. Quite amazing. Um, a lot of
this has been developed with a
combination of optical and X-rays in
order to detect the very very hot gas,
very low density but very very high
temperature gas in the uh shell of the g
the galaxy cluster here. And so I'll
just leave you with that picture of NGC
474 and 470 um looking to merge together
perhaps in the future or have already
had one pass through the other and
create those delicate shells. So thanks
very much for listening and that was
once around shell galaxies.